---
layout: post
title: Lab 05 - Python & Approaches Programming
subtitle: When is Coding Necessary?
gh-repo: daattali/beautiful-jekyll
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [lab report]
---

### Part 1
1. As we talked about in class, “W” matches only non-word characters, and therefore cuts or excludes, yes, all non-word characters. This means that it also interprets any non-word characters (‘) as means of separation and thus takes the second component of a contraction as its own word (the “s” in “let’s”).  The “+” then asks the system to match all  instances of non-word characters (not just the first). It is not so much the “+” that is causing the system to mis-recognize the “s,” but the exclusivity of the “/W.” 
2. In my first attempt, I mindlessly did exactly what the Lab Notebook urges us not to do and forgot to put my chosen words in quotes. Once I corrected this error, however, the words in my string were printed as requested by the function (lower case and split as individual items—therefore separated by commas and in single quotations). 
3.  The most important thing in relation to Jessica’s research question that this data frame shows us is the number of occurrences of “virtu” and “vertu” in each text where one or both appear(s). It also provides the relative and/or estimated date of publication and author, allowing us to (roughly) trace the phasing out of “vertu” over time. 
	Last week, we talked a little bit about the function of tags, and we see that here they are used to identify the values under each column. One thing I don’t entirely understand, however, is why there are only nine texts here. I can’t seem to locate the function that asks the computer to truncate the file.
4. According to the handy Python Regex Library—and apparently not according to my immediate memory, because I did use this expression two labs ago—“^” tells the computer to match the start of the string. It seems then, “^20” says to match anything in the date column starting with “20” and replace that number with, well, nothing (as represented by “ “). I believe this is because “20” does not provide any reliable clues as to a specific date within the early modern period. 

### Part 2
Prior, this lab, I had encountered Python only once, or rather, over one summer. A couple years back, when I had just finished my first year of teaching high school and was heading toward my second, unsure of whether I could teach K-12 much longer (but not because of the students!)—and very much questioning whether majoring in the humanities (and social sciences) was perhaps a very big mistake—I enrolled in a (pre-COVID) online course through FIU. It was titled something along the lines of… surprise… “Intro to Python.” While the instructor was very clear and the course was interface very user friendly, I really did not retain much because I had no particular reason to learn Python at the time. (Other than that I thought maybe it’d open the potential for other career opportunities.) I think the most applicable-to-my-interests mini project I completed was a code that generated specific (targeted?) messages based on users’ (that is, imagined users’) individual voting history (which I would obtain via input, of course). In the end, though, I don’t even think I went through and finished the exam for the course (to earn the little certificate of completion) because, frankly, I grew uninterested and more and more unsure of how I might apply the few skills I had obtained to any of my actual research desires. 
In reading the experiences of Quinn, Roopsi, and Katia, I am getting the sense that I am not alone in having not actually retained much upon my first go at programming (outside of markup languages, which I also do not remember very clearly, actually). Like any language, I really do believe now that it is only through necessary application that the inner-workings of a programming language might actually be understood. Or, [like Quinn says](https://datasittersclub.github.io/site/dsc12.html), “you’ll only get somewhere with a language if you have to use it… you’ll only use it if you have a reason.” 
The experiences of Quinn, Katia, and Roopsi are encouraging now that I find myself in an academic program where useful application of code is being supported. That said, it is sometimes hard to hear stories of researchers at top universities who just sort of fall into coding by virtue of academic capital. I don’t know that the experiences of Quinn, Roopsi, and Katia would have felt as inspiring had I come across them while working an 8-5. I do think that the DSC members, though, are just being transparent, and while they are mostly speaking to academic audiences, they are taking a huge step towards accessibility by offering up their knowledge and experiences for free. 
Criticisms of some slight unacknowledged social and economic privilege aside, I really like the few sections of [DSC 12](https://datasittersclub.github.io/site/dsc12.html) that deal with questions about language preference and universality. One of my absolute favorite books to read with high schoolers (I promise this is connected) was Mohsin Hamid’s *Exit West*. The text presents a world where borders begin to dissipate via technological advances (or magic… this remains contentious debate), but the wealth and opportunity gap ever increases. One of the questions I ask (asked, I guess, but I’m sticking with present tense for the sake of narration) my students about halfway through the text is whether there are forms of universal communication. Some say yes: math and maybe programming. Others refute that claim, pointing out that math in Greek looks different than math in English (I taught at a Greek immersion school). That is, the broadest concepts or general principles might be the same, but in Greek math, students use different characters, ask different questions, and often employ different steps. I find that Quinn’s polling data might represent a similar concept with regard to programming. It seems that the discrepancies in programming preference by language exist maybe because of the type of questions that are being asked by those working in particular languages. And, that they cannot so much be explained a by fundamental agreement between one particular human language and another particular programming languages. I’m really compelled by the idea that no one programming language is inherently universal or inexhaustibly adaptable, and that’s okay. 

### Part 3
Finally, choosing a dataset to work with for Lab 6 was hard, because there seemed to be a number of interesting and applicable options. I think I am going to go with the WhatEvery1Says [“comparison-not-humanities"](https://zenodo.org/record/5068699#.Yh-FFFjMJQI) dataset, because although is does not deal with a collection of literary work, it focuses on the use of the word “person” (among others) within the context of mainstream U.S. News.  I am interested, though it was not necessarily the goal of those who compiled this data, to look at how/how often “person” is presented in relation to body and ability—and further, *how* it is. 
